                                OS-9 GED Notes

                                   10/5/94



GED for OS-9 is a FREEware utility that can be distributed at will.  You

cannot not, however, SELL this utility either by itself or with any other

product.



GED reads through a MPEG multiplex file (.mmd file) and generates the

following files with various "extensions":



.dlt - the delta file, used by master versions 4.1 and previous for

creating a real time file from the multiplex file.



.pkl - the pink list, which contains selected entry points in the format

that the multiplexing utility PINK generates, which is also the format

master requires for including entry points in the real time file

(ep_list internal   keywords).



.ir - the entry point list (sometimes called scan list) in MediaMogul DV

format (DV Plugin version 2.0 and later).  This .ir file is loaded using a

Background video command in ScriptWriter.



.pil - the entry point list in the Philips VCD application (versions

3.00 and later) format.





If not otherwise specified, the root name of the multiplex (.mmd) file

is used, with the extensions above.  For example:



        ged nasa01.mmd



would generate:  nasa01.dlt, nasa01.pkl, nasa01.ir, and nasa01.pil.



Notes:



1. Specifying 0 for the -s option finds ALL reference I frames

preceded by a sequence header.  Many encoders space the I frames at 1/2

second intervals, which would create an entry point list excessively

large. Entry points in an entry point list are reccomended to be no closer

than every 2 seconds (the default for ged).



2. For MediaMogul users: if you use ged, there is no longer a need for

running ep_extract.  You will need to run ep_print to generate an "English"

listing of SMPTE time stamps, related sector numbers, and the buffer size

number needed by the DV plugin.



3. The CD-RTOS "shell" from MediaMogul has a few screen formatting

issues that cause ged to place screen output in other than desired spots

- readable, but not pretty.  We reccomend that you use the 605

SETTINGS-SYSTEM shell for proper screen displays.



4. ged can be run on the emulator, which speeds the utility

considerably.



5. Abbreviated command line help can be invoked by the -h option

(ged -h).


