CATALOG OF CD-I TECHNICAL NOTES
MARCH 22, 1994
TECHNICAL NOTE #022
Using RGB555 Images
Anderson, Eric - AIM
A technical note to call attention to special handling requirements for
RGB555 images. Use of the UCM function dm_write() is discussed along
with IFF storage format considerations, and the use of RGB images in
real-time files.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #034
DYUV Panning Algorithms
Townsend, Dave - Capitol Disc
Algorithms for panning a large DYUV draw map.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #039
NTSC Coloring Problems
Wood, Rodney E. - AIM
Most CD-I applications designers make some assumptions about the
video output from the consumer CD-I player. Some assume that the
player is connected to an RGB monitor and others assume that the
connections is to a television. Small pixel patterns are displayed quite
differently on an RGB monitor and on an NTSC television. This
document describes some caveats regarding the use of the bit patterns
in CD-I.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #041
CD-I Application Library/Trap Handler Usage
Anderson, Eric - AIM
This technical note describes the use of trap handlers found in CD-RTOS
ROM. Using trap handlers allows you to save application memory.
Additional memory can be saved by removing stack checking code.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #042
Reduction of Flicker in Interlaced Pictures
Richards, Norman - PRL
Contrary to general belief, the base case CD-I system, the JNMS player,
is capable of displaying interlaced pictures in a trivial manner and in a
way entirely consistent with the Green Book standard.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #044
Using Functions With Variable-Length Argument Lists in OS-9
Rader, Kirk - AIM
OS-9 does not contain standard mechanisms for writing C code using
functions that take variable-length argument lists. With special care,
however, it is possible to use conventional techniques when writing C
code under OS-9.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #046
Restrictions on the Use of Load CLUT Color Instructions
Anderson, Eric - AIM
This technical note describes a hardware restriction with the new VSR
chip found in all CD-RTOS vl.0 players and CD-I development
platforms. This restriction is not described in the current Green Book
Specification (14 November 1988), but in all likelihood will be
included in the next edition.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #048
Preparing CD-I Titles for the International Marketplace
van Luijt, Alty - PIMA
Different levels of preparation may be adopted by CD-I developers to
assure that CD-I titles can be used on various television systems in the
international marketplace. This note makes some recommendations to
assist CD-I developers in preparing their titles for international
distribution.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #047
Real-Time Code Loading
Golvin, Charles - PIMA
This technical note describes a method for loading an executable
program from a real time record and executing that program. This
technique may be used by titles with memory considerations provided
the title engineer is able to divide the title into separately compiled
programs. This technique does not provide the ability to load, execute,
and return from a code fragment, such as a function or subroutine.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #049
Performance Considerations in CD-RTOS
van Luijt, Alty - PIMA
Although recent changes in the 1.0 Philips JNMS player and in CD-RTOS
have resulted in better responsiveness, title designers and
software engineers can take additional steps to assure satisfactory
performance from a CD-I disc.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #051
EASI: Editing and Animation Sound Interface
Mills, Rusty - PIMA
EASI is a movieola-style CD-I system that allows you to edit sound to
exact frames. By dispensing with the need to use real-time files, EASI
dramatically reduces the time required to edit.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #052
Notes on QHYB: Base Case QHY
Richards, Norman - PRL
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #053
UVLO: Motion-Video Encoding and Decoding
Kirk Rader, Philips IMS and Stephen Tickell, PRL
UVLO is a motion-video encoding tool developed at Philips
Research Laboratory in England. The UVLO technique for video
data compression is derived from DYUV. UVLO takes advantage
of the fact that the human eye is more sensitive to differences in
brightness than to variations in color. UVLO reduces the amount
of stored UV information by a factor of 2 over DYUV, thus greatly
compressing the image data and increasing the screen area that can
be covered by the image.
Recovered from the Engineering 5.0 disc.
TECHNICAL NOTE #054
Error Strategy for CD-I Final Product Deliverable
van Luijt, Alty - PIMA .
An earlier AIM technical note, #43.1, on recommended error tolerance
strategy has been widely ignored by titles in production. The current
note describes the preferred and minimum requirements for error
tolerance for alpha tape deliverables to AIM. Non-compliance with at
least the minimum strategy is reason for rejection of the alpha tape.
Supersedes and replaces AIM TN#43.1 by Robert Patton.
TECHNICAL NOTE #055
CD-RTOS: Status of Problems Reported by AIM
Philip van Allen
This is a status report on problems in CD-RTOS that were reported by AIM.
Some will be fixed for the 18x players with the
CD-RTOS 1.1 release, others will be fixed for the 60x professional series
and 20x consumer series players; some problems will result in changes to the Green Book.
CD-RTOS 1.1 will have numerous bug fixes and improved memory allocation behavior. It will include modifications to accommodate recent Green Book changes. It is scheduled for release in August, 1990, and will be installed in the 18x players.
Recovered from the Engineering 5.0 disc.
TECHNICAL NOTE #056
CARLIE: Compressed AIM Run-Length Image Encoding
Pferdner, Richard - Adaptive Design
CARLIE is a technique for compressing run-length encoded images.
The number of bytes required for a run-length encoded image is
reduced by compressing the image in the vertical direction. CARLIE
works best with cartoon-like images whose original size is under 20K.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #057.1
Initializing a Player's Configurable Parameters (revised)
van Allen, Philip; revised by Charles Golvin - PIMA
The "CD-I Full Functional Specification" does not guarantee that the CD-i
player will "boot" with a specific configuration. Therefore, the
application must initialize the player's configurable parameters or risk
unexpected behavior.
Revised and supersedes TN# 57.
TECHNICAL NOTE #058
Notes from Charlie Golvin: SCCS Usage, Portation to SPARC, etc.
Golvin, Charles - PIMA
This technical note is an informal compendium of issues and
techniques of interest to CD-I developers. In includes discussion of
non real-time sectors in real-time files, the use of error detection code
in Form 2 sectors, the use of AIM "include" files, the portation of code
to the SUN SPARC environment, the use of SCCS, error detection in
PCLs, and two useful programs.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #060
Recommended Disc Building Pathways
Golvin, Charles - PIMA
In this technical note, disc building pathways that do not employ
buildcd are recommended to AIM title engineers. These pathways will
shorten the turnaround time required for disc building.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #061
Software Sprites in CD-I
van Luijt, Alty - PIMA
Architecturally, CD-i is not very similar to a "game machine."
Characteristics, such as sprites and collision detection, are not
supported by the hardware. Yet CD-i's powerful graphics capabilities,
relatively powerful CPU, two-plane video display architecture, built-in
run-length logic, and superior audio circuitry--all under the control of
a real-time operation system--can provide substantial functionality in
the domain of action games, albeit at a different level of sophistication.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #062
Living with Reality: Remaining Bugs in CD-RTOS 1.1
van Luijt, Alty - PIMA
In the state currently reached by CD-i players, many of the older
problems have been resolved and a very workable situation has been
achieved. However, a number of issues remain: the actual available
implementation may deviate from Green Book definitions or the Green
Book definitions are ambiguous. The time has come for title
productions to face these items and plan strategies to work around
them, rather than to rely on fixes in a future version of the player or
its software. This note describes some of the points that have to be
taken into account and suggests workarounds whenever possible. The
notion of a workaround is such that the solution that is suggested is
always upward compatible; that is, discs that utilize these
workarounds will work well on future players, even after the player
bugs have been fixed.
No revisions. Formerly PIMA TN#62.
TECHNICAL NOTE #063
Display Synchronization in CD-I
van Luijt, Alty - PIMA
CD-i has a fairly elaborate display architecture and correspondingly
complex system software support. The different functions are
explained in this technical note, with the emphasis on setting up the
display system in such a way that glitches can be avoided. This is
probably not an issue for "simple titles," where the functionality as
provided by UCM is already adequate. However, titles that rely on
more complex imagery composited from both video planes need to pay
attention to the problems raised in this note. Two solutions are
described, one that relies on careful planning of transitions, while the
other describes a more fundamental solution by properly
synchronizing the transition with the display timing.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #064
Using the GNU Cross Compiler
Golvin, Charles - PIMA
Capitol Disc recently merged two implementations of GNU to produce a
cross compiler that runs under the SunOS and produces OS-9 assembly
code. The GUN cross compiler employs the Microware assembler (o68)
and linker l68) to produce code executable on the CD-i player.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #065
High Resolution Graphics Tools
Vitz, Frank
The CD-i community needs techniques for capturing, converting, and
displaying still images of the highest possible quality for inclusion in a
variety of CD-i applications. The tools discussed here were developed
to provide a production pathway to QHYB images; however, they may
also be used wherever producers need to produce high resolution
images.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #066
Accessing Audio Files on a CD-I Disc
van Luijt, Alty - PIMA
CD-i has inherited some addressing conventions from CD audio which
are discussed in this note. A two-second off set exists between the
"Absolute Time" base and the "Logical Block Numbers" used in
accessing files.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #067.2
Tape Submission of Disc Images (revised)
Golvin, Charles - PIMA
This document is intended to completely describe the format of a tape
containing a CD-i disc image, whether the disc image is submitted for
mastering by a disc replication facility or submitted to PIMA to
produce a limited number of one-off (WORM) discs. IN addition, the
process of making such a tape on the Macintosh using the standard
PIMA-recommended tape writing utilities and on the Sun using a
public domain tape-writing utility is described.
Revised 8/25/92. Supersedes PIMA TN#67.1 (PIMA internal
distribution only) and PIMA TN#67.
TECHNICAL NOTE #068
The CD-I Player and NVRUI
Lediaev, Lucy - PIMA
This document is a summary of the purpose and functions of the user
interface to the CD-i player's non-volatile RAM. The information in this
note was drawn from the AIM design document, "User Interface
Design Criteria and Recommendations for NV-RAM," by Blake,
Kaufman, van Luijt, and van Allen, and from a talk given to the AIM
Product Test organization by Tyler Blake. The goal of this summary is
to provide information on NVRUI to CD-i producers, designers, product
testers, and other non-engineering personnel.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #069
Technical Status of the Philips 910 CD-I Player
van Luijt, Alty - PIMA
In the current state of CD-i players, many of the older problems have
been resolved, and a very workable situation has been achieved.
However, a number of issues remain in which the actual available
implementations deviate from Green Book definitions, where Green
Book definitions are somewhat ambiguous, or where timing aspects
play a role. This note describes some of the issues that need to be
taken into account and suggests workarounds whenever possible. The
notion of a workaround implies that the suggested solution is always
compatible. That is, discs that utilize these workarounds will work well
on future players, even after the player bugs have been fixed or
timing constraints have been relaxed.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #070.1
Inhibiting the Replication of Global Data
Golvin, Charles - PIMA
This technical note describes a method of inhibiting the double
memory cost that applications pay for initialized data, initialized data
references, and initialized code references.
Revised 8/20/92. Supersedes PIMA TN#70.
TECHNICAL NOTE #071.1
Resource Compiler/Manager for CD-I Applications (revised)
Ellinwood, Ken - PIMA
This technical note describes a method for loading and accessing pre-initialized
data at run-time. This method is intended to aid in the
development of data-driven CD-i applications. This technical note
supersedes the note for the original version (1.0) Dated December 2,
1991, and pertains to version 1.1 of the software.
Supersedes PIMA TN#71.
TECHNICAL NOTE #072
Passing Open Paths Between Processes (revised)
Golvin, Charles - PIMA
CD-i applications may employ more than one process. It may be
required that these processes share a path to an open device. This note
describes the technique for passing open paths between processes, and
for determining the type of CD-i device associated with a path number.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #073.2
Reading the Player Control Keys
Golvin, Charles - PIMA
A proposed addendum to the Green Book describes the
implementation of the Player Control Keys (PCKs). This note gives
concrete examples of how to actually implement these keys on both
the Philips 910 player and, for debugging purposes, on the Philips 18x
player. This note has been revised to describe the role of the ss_enable
function in the use of the PCKs.
Supersedes PIMA TN#73.1 and 73.
TECHNICAL NOTE #074
Abekas A60 Tape Utility
Berson, Lisa - PIMA
This utility allows you to extract frames from an Abekas A60 back-up
tape in CD-I IFF RGB888 file format. It also allows you to create an
Abekas A60 back-up tape from CD-I IFF RGB888 files. This utility
runs on a Sun3 or Sun4 machine.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #075
Recommended Disc Labeling Conventions for PIMA Titles
Topel, Drew - PIMA
This note provides disc labeling conventions that take into account the
features offered by various CD-i player manufacturers. For instance,
some manufacturers will make volume and album identifiers
accessible to the user. Thus, the information placed in these fields
needs to be accurate and consistent with usage on other titles.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #076
Differences between the Philips 18x and 605 Development Platforms
Golvin, Charles - PIMA
This note summarizes the major differences between the Philips 18x
and 605 development platforms. This note is based on revision 1.1 of
the 605 ROM.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #077
Implementing a Compass Cursor in CD-I
Hunt, Kevin and Yoon, Douglas - PIMA
This note lays out a method for implementing a compass cursor
(frequently used in traditional arcade games) in CD-i. The method
described here relies heavily on the Balboa System Cursor/Hotspot
Manager. Thus, familiarity with the Balboa System is required for
successful implementation of the compass cursor described here.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #078
A Technique for Menu Highlighting
Senftner, Blake - PIMA
This note reviews a simple method for menu highlighting that is also
very flexible. It involves use of a DYUV background image with a
series of run-length 7 (RL7) images. It can be used to highlight
standard menu hotspots and can be adapted for use with slide bars
and other graphical controls.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #079
Monitoring Audio Play from Memory
Golvin, Charles - PIMA
This technical note summarizes the methods available for monitoring
audio play from memory. In particular, this note describes differences
between the Green Book description and current implementation for
some of these methods.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #080
Using Sub-Routine Modules
Golvin, Charles - PIMA
This technical note describes the use of OS-9 subroutine modules in
order to dynamically load executable code on demand.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #081
Using SrcDbg to Debug CD-I Software
Ellinwood, Ken - PIMA
Microware's source level debugger, SrcDbg, is a very useful tool for
debugging CD-I software. This document offers many hints and tricks
that make the debugger easier to use. This document is not intended
as a tutorial on SrcDbg commands or how to use debuggers.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #082
A Graphical Method for Hotspot Generation
Trott, Graham - BEPL
This note describes a graphical method for defining hotspots and an
MPW script for generating resource compiler source or any other
source that acts as input to the CD-I build. This method uses the
depict tool, part of Palomar Software's PICT Detective.™
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #083
A Compression Algorithm for Monochrome Images
Trott, Graham - BEPL
A compression algorithm was developed during solution of the
problem of putting up a graphical error screen which needed to be
kept in memory at all times. The compression method discussed
herein results in a considerable reduction of the image storage
requirements for these error screens.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #084
ArtSpace Animation Conversion Pathway
Senftner, Blake - PIMA
This note describes the use of the program anim_converter. This is a
UNIX-based program that takes a series of TGA or RGB888 images and
converts them to a set of RL7 images suitable for compiling as an
animation to be used as part of a CD-I title.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #085.1
Ensuring Title Compatibility Across Players
Golvin, Charles - PIMA
This technical note describes potential issues to which a title developer
must attend in order to assure compatibility with all CD-I players. In
particular, some issues exposed by the introduction of the Philips 220
player are discussed.
Supersedes TN#85.
TECHNICAL NOTE #086
Improved DYUV Encoding Methods
Burley, Brent - PIMA
This note describes a DYUV encoding method which examines an
entire scan line as opposed to the pixel-by-pixel method. This method
can reduce error in the converted image and can meet the additional
constraints required for DYUV "blitting." Two new tools, rgbdyuv and
dyuvfit, have been developed to take advantage of this method.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #087
Memory Allocation in CD-RTOS
Golvin, Charles - PIMA
This technical note describes how memory is allocated in CD-RTOS. It
also provides guidelines for how to best control memory allocations
and, therefore, prevent fragmentation.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #088
Status of the Digital Video System
Charles Golvin - PIMA
This technical note describes reported problems with the initial CD-i
Digital Video system. These reports consist of both confirmed and
potential problems.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #089
A New Method for Video Scan Synchronization in CD-i
Jon Piesing - PRL
This technical note describes three methods of video scan
synchronization in CD-i, two that are described in the Green Book and
one recently discovered by the author. This is of particular significance
to highly interactive action games, since the two Green Book methods
fall far short of what is available on other platforms.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #090
Improved Seek Times with I$Seek
Luijks, Cor - IMS; and Golvin, Charles - PIMA
This technical note describes the use of the function I$Seek to improve
seek times.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #091
A Beginner's Guide to Balboa Edition 1
Rolff, Jan - IMS; Maxfield, Andy - IMS; and Piesing, Jon - PRL
This document provides a simple overview of Balboa and includes a
simple slide-show application.
No revisions. Formerly IMS TSA#001R to be re-released under this
number.
TECHNICAL NOTE #092
Audio Considerations in CD-I
van Luijt, Alty - IMS
In CD-i there are two mechanisms for audio playback, direct and
through sound maps. Each of them, and especially the combination,
have some caveats. This note describes what tradeoffs play a role in
this area.
No revisions. Formerly IMS TSA#002 to be re-released under this
number.
TECHNICAL NOTE #093
Image Formats for Compatibility
van Luijt, Alty - IMS
This application note describes the various CD-I screen considerations
in 525, 625 line, and wide screen (16:9) television formats. It
emphasizes what a producer can do when 625 line. production
equipment is used. Refer to TECHNICAL NOTE 009 by the same author
for a USA perspective.
No revisions. Formerly IMS TSA#003 to be re-released under this
number.
TECHNICAL NOTE #094
Various Time Bases in CD-I
van Luijt, Alty - IMS
The CD-i player has three different time bases; the disc rate, the video
filed rate, and the timer or system tick. This note describes the
properties of these time bases and the pitfalls that an application has
to avoid to achieve proper operations across a variety of players.
No revisions. Formerly IMS TSA#004 to be re-released under this
number.
TECHNICAL NOTE #095
Media Mogul Script-to-Disc
van der Meer, Sander - IMS
The Media Mogul authoring software requires the Script-to-Disc
software to create CD-i images to be tested out on an emulator. This
note describes two options for Script-to-Disc: running it in-house or at
Philips IMS in Eindhoven.
No revisions. Formerly IMS TSA#005 to be re-released under this
number.
TECHNICAL NOTE #096
Emulator and Emulation
van Vroonhoven, Joost - IMS
Creating a CD-i application involves collecting and encoding of assets
and the writing of application software to implement the interactivity.
After premastering, the CD-i disc image can be tested on a CD-i player
connected to an emulator. This note describes the various aspects of
emulation on different hosts.
No revisions. Formerly IMS TSA#006 to be re-released under this
number.
TECHNICAL NOTE #097
The Full Motion System for CD-I
van der Meer, Jan - IMS
The full motion system is defined to extend CD-i with the capability to
play moving natural pictures on full screen with associated audio of
compact disc quality. To play full motion sequences from CD-i disc
requires compression of the audiovisual information to the CD-I bit
rate. The full motion system applies a compression method based on
the MPEG standard. This note describes the features of the CD-i full
motion system, application of the MPEG standard for full motion and
the architecture of a full motion CD-i player. Major parts of this
application note have been published in the paper, "The Full Motion
System for CD-i" in the November, 1992, issue of IEEE Transactions on
Consumer Electronics."
No revisions. Formerly IMS TSA#007 to be re-released under this
number.
TECHNICAL NOTE #098
Introduction to Programming the FMV System
Ellinwood, Ken - PIMA
This paper reveals the basic knowledge required to successfully
implement simple FMV features, such as play, pause, slow motion, and
scan. The build-time tools, run-time algorithms and data structures
required to support these features are covered. Code examples are
used to illustrate the techniques described.
No revisions. Formerly IMS TSA#008 to be re-released under this
number.
TECHNICAL NOTE #099
Balboa Video Manager Insights 1
Piesing, Jon - PRL; and Rolff, Jan - IMS
This document contains an introduction to the Balboa video manager.
It concludes with an example of a DYUV movie.
No revisions. Formerly IMS TSA#009 to be re-released under this
number.
TECHNICAL NOTE #100
Balboa Video Manager Insights 2
Piesing, Jon - PRL; and Rolff, Jan - IMS
This document contains an introduction to the Balboa video manager.
It concludes with an example of a scrolling CLUT screen.
No revisions. Formerly IMS TSA#010 to be re-released under this
number.
TECHNICAL NOTE #101
Extension Memory in CD-i
Golvin, Charles - Philips Interactive Media
This technical note describes how extension memory is provided in
CD-i. It also provides guidelines for the specific instance of the one
additional megabyte of system memory provided in the Philips Digital
Video cartridge.
No revisions.
TECHNICAL NOTE #102
EOS Problem in Current DV Cartridge
Maris, Stefan
Parallel processing of video material on several computers to create
MPEG data streams may results in the creation of extraneous end of
sequence (EOS) codes. Occasionally, the DV cartridge loses count of its
frames after encountering an EOS code, which may result in read
errors or system crashes. This note recommends removal of
unnecessary EOS codes from the MPEG stream. and provides source
code for the program "patcheos," which performs this removal
operation.
